                                          FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                             1




                                                    Factor- and Composite-Based Structural Equation Modeling - A New
arXiv:2508.06112v2 [stat.ME] 1 Apr 2026




                                               Approach to Incorporate Composites in the Traditional SEM Framework


                                                    Tamara Schamberger1 , Florian Schuberth2 , Jörg Henseler2,3 , and Yves Rosseel4
                                            1
                                                Bielefeld University, Faculty of Business Administration and Management, Bielefeld,
                                                                                    33615, Germany
                                           2
                                               University of Twente, Department of Design, Production and Management, Enschede,
                                                                                7500 AE, The Netherlands
                                                3
                                                    Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Nova Information Management School, Campus de
                                                                          Campolide, 1070-312 Lisboa, Portugal
                                                        4
                                                            Ghent University, Department of Data Analysis, 9000 Ghent, Belgium
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                            2


                                       Author Note

        Tamara Schamberger       https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7845-784X
       Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Tamara
Schamberger, Department Empirical Methods, Bielefeld University, Universitaetsstrasse 25,
33615 Bielefeld, Germany; tamara.schamberger@uni-bielefeld.de
       Yves Rosseel and Tamara Schamberger acknowledge that this work was supported
by the FWO (Fonds voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek – Vlaanderen) under the project
number G073026N.
       Jörg Henseler acknowledges that this work was supported by national funds through
FCT (Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia), under the project - UID/04152/2025 -
Centro de Investigação em Gestão de Informação (MagIC)/NOVA IMS -
https://doi.org/10.54499/UID/04152/2025 <https://doi.org/10.54499/UID/04152/2025>
(2025-01-01/2028-12-31) and UID/PRR/04152/2025
https://doi.org/10.54499/UID/PRR/04152/2025
<https://doi.org/10.54499/UID/PRR/04152/2025> (2025-01-01/ 2026-06-30).
       During the preparation of this study, we used ChatGPT to improve the readability
and language of the manuscript. After using this tool, the authors have reviewed and
edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the publication’s content.
       A preprint of this manuscript is available on arXiv:
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2508.06112.
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                             3


                                          Abstract

Structural equation modeling (SEM) is a prevalent approach for studying constructs.
Traditionally, these constructs are modeled as reflectively measured latent variables –
common factors that account for the variance-covariance structure of their associated
indicators. Over the past two decades, there has been growing interest in an alternative
way of modeling constructs: the composite, i.e., a linear combination of indicators.
However, existing approaches to estimating composite models either limit researchers from
fully leveraging SEM’s capabilities, such as handling missing data, evaluating overall model
fit, and testing group differences, or significantly increase complexity of the model
specification by introducing additional variables. Against this background, this paper
presents a new way of integrating both common factors and composites in the traditional
SEM framework. Our presented model specification, along with its model-implied
variance-covariance matrix, enables researchers to: (i) utilize well-established SEM
estimators, including maximum likelihood and generalized least squares estimators, and (ii)
can leverage developments from the traditional SEM framework in terms of model
specification, evaluation, and handling of missing data. This way of analyzing structural
equation models involving common factors and composites is referred to as factor- and
composite-based SEM (FC-SEM). This advancement aims to enhance the flexibility and
applicability of SEM in analyzing constructs.
       Keywords: Maximum Likelihood Estimation, Formative Constructs, Reflective
Constructs, Missing Values, Structural Equation Modeling
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                                         4


      Factor- and Composite-Based Structural Equation Modeling - A New
    Approach to Incorporate Composites in the Traditional SEM Framework

        Structural equation modeling (SEM) is a widely used statistical technique to study
constructs and their relationships, i.e., relationships between constructs and their
relationships with observed variables, so called indicators (Bollen, 1989). Its versatility has
made SEM indispensable in various disciplines, including psychology (MacCallum &
Austin, 2000), criminology (Higgins, 2002), and business research (Hult et al., 2006). By
encompassing a variety of statistical techniques such as confirmatory factor analysis
(Jöreskog, 1969), confirmatory composite analysis (Schuberth et al., 2018a), regression
analysis (Graham, 2008), and latent growth curve analysis (McArdle, 1988), SEM provides
a comprehensive framework for modeling and testing theories.

        In research across various disciplines, accurately modeling constructs – whether
constructs that are measured like mental health (e.g., Gerino et al., 2017) or constructs
that are formed like socio-economic status (Chen et al., 2025) – is crucial (e.g., Bollen &
Bauldry, 2011; Strauss & Smith, 2009). These constructs, often not directly observed, are
inferred from a set of other variables. Traditionally, researchers model constructs as
common factors in SEM, i.e., latent variables explaining the variance-covariance structure
of their indicators (Jöreskog, 1969; Spearman, 1904). Consequently, common factors are
assumed to be the underlying common cause of their indicators. An example is illustrated
in Figure 1, where the common factor η underlies its measures y1 , . . . , yP . The variance in
a measure yi that cannot be explained by the common factor is captured by the
corresponding random measurement error εi (Bollen, 1989).1 This approach is particularly
useful for modeling constructs that are measured such as intelligence, emotions, or
attitudes (Henseler, 2021).

        Several approaches to study structural equation models involving common factors

1
  Instead of speaking from random measurement errors, the literature sometimes refers to εi as unique
factor (e.g., Jöreskog, 1969).
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                               5


have been developed. Traditionally, estimators that minimize the discrepancy between the
model-implied and the sample variance-covariance matrix of the observed variables are used
to estimate the model parameters. Estimating and analyzing structural equation models
involving common factors with such approaches is considered the standard across many
disciplines. Therefore, we refer to this type of SEM as the traditional SEM framework in
the following sections. These include approaches such as normal-theory-based generalized
least squares (Browne, 1984; Jöreskog & Goldberger, 1972), weighted least squares
(Browne, 1974) and the maximum likelihood (ML) estimators (Jöreskog, 1969, 1970). The
latter is nowadays regarded as the gold standard for estimating structural equation models
(Hoyle & Gottfredson, 2023). Additionally, alternative approaches have emerged to
estimate structural equation models involving common factors. These approaches rely on
composites, i.e., linear combinations of observed variables for this purpose. This includes
methods such as sum score regression (Richardson, 1936) and partial least squares path
modeling (PLS-PM, Wold, 1975). Initially touted for their smaller sample requirements
and milder distribution assumptions, these approaches are known to yield biased parameter
estimates when used for structural equation models involving common factors (e.g.,
Rigdon, 2016; Schuberth, Hubona, et al., 2023; Schuberth et al., 2024).


       However, not all constructs are assumed to be the underlying cause of their
indicators (Rhemtulla et al., 2020); for example, constructs such as a company’s
attractiveness are more plausibly formed by variables such as perceiving the company as
successful in attracting high-quality employees, being able to imagine working there oneself
and liking the company’s physical appearance (Hair et al., 2022). When such constructs
are nevertheless modeled as common factors, this can result in poor construct validity,
where the modeled construct fails to represent the actual construct of interest (Rhemtulla
et al., 2020). This misalignment can lead to substantial parameter biases, particularly in
relationships between constructs, and adversely affect model assessment (e.g., Schuberth
et al., 2024). In such cases, researchers risk drawing wrong conclusions from their analyses.
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                               6


For these reasons, some constructs are better represented as composites (Cho et al., 2022;
Henseler, 2017; Hwang, Cho, Jung, et al., 2021; Schuberth, 2023) which assume that the
construct is composed of its indicators (Henseler & Schuberth, 2020b; Yu et al., 2021).
Modeling constructs as composites is particularly useful if the construct is formed by
humans (Henseler, 2021) or if the construct is a collection of heterogeneous causes (Grace
& Bollen, 2008). For example, extraversion in human development research has been
modeled as a composite composed of warmth, gregariousness, assertiveness, activity,
excitement seeking, and positive emotions (Edwards & Bagozzi, 2000); The firm
performance index in information systems research has been modeled as a composite
composed of customer relationships, operational excellence, and revenue growth (Rai et al.,
2006); Soil conditions in ecology has been modeled as a composite composed of soil texture,
soil moisture, and soil ph (Verheyen et al., 2003). As Figure 2 illustrates, composites do
not impose restrictions on the variance-covariance structure of their indicators,
fundamentally distinguishing them from common factors. Therefore, in line with Grace
and Bollen (2008), we illustrate composites as hexagons instead of circles to distinguish
them from latent variables. Moreover, applications of composites in SEM include item
parcels (Little et al., 2002) and fixed-weights composites, i.e., linear combinations of
observed variables with given weights, like sum scores (Schuberth et al., 2025).


       As awareness of the different types of constructs has increased, so has the need for
approaches to deal with structural equation models involving both composites and common
factors. Estimators that build composites for parameter estimation, such as PLS-PM,
generalized structured component analysis (GSCA, Hwang & Takane, 2004), and a
maximum likelihood (ML) estimator for composite models (Chapter 6, Schamberger, 2022)
are naturally candidates for this purpose. However, these approaches are limited to
studying structural equation models involving composites. To overcome these limitations,
consistent partial least squares (PLSc, Dijkstra & Henseler, 2015a), integrated generalized
structured component analysis (IGSCA, Hwang et al., 2020), singular value decomposition
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                             7


SEM (SVD-SEM, Tenenhaus et al., 2025), and a restricted ML estimator (RML-SEM,
Tenenhaus et al., 2025) can be used to consistently estimate structural equation models
involving common factors and composites. However, these approaches do not leverage the
full capabilities of approaches developed in the traditional SEM framework, such as model
assessment and handling missing data, or can only be used to estimate standardized path
coefficients. Attempts have been made to deal with this issue by incorporating composites
in the traditional SEM framework. These include the two-step approach, the one-step
approach (Grace & Bollen, 2008), the pseudo-indicator approach (Rose et al., 2019), and
the H-O specification (Henseler, 2021; Schuberth, 2023). Yet, these approaches are limited,
as they either do not allow composites to be in dependent positions in the structural model
(as for the one-step approach), do not allow the composite weights to be freely estimated
(as for the pseudo-indicator and the two-step approach), or they increase the complexity of
specifying the model (as for the H-O specification). To conclude, current approaches to
modeling composites and common factors face limitations in terms of model specification,
model complexity, model assessment, and the applicability of advanced analytical
procedures established in the traditional SEM framework.


       To overcome these limitations, we introduce a new way of incorporating composites
and common factors jointly in the traditional SEM framework, called factor- and
composite-based SEM (FC-SEM). Specifically, we present the model specification and
derive the implications of the model on the model-implied variances and covariances of the
variables in such a way that (i) estimators developed in the traditional SEM framework can
be directly applied, (ii) we can deal with models containing both composites and common
factors, and (iii) we allow for different scaling methods for both composites and common
factors. As a result, we can directly rely on enhancements such as model assessment
criteria, and approaches to dealing with missing values developed in the traditional SEM
framework. Therefore, our presented approach overcomes the limitations of other
approaches to estimate structural equation models involving common factors and
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                               8


composites by allowing for parameter constraints, flexibly modeling composites, and an
intuitive model specification.

       The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. We begin by reviewing the
current state of integrating composites and common factors in structural equation models.
We then introduce our approach by explaining the specification, the implications on the
variables’ model-implied variances and covariances, the identification, the estimation, and
the assessment of these models. Further, our approach is implemented in the open-source
R package lavaan (Rosseel, 2012; Rosseel et al., 2025). We discuss this implementation
followed by a scenario analysis that illustrates how to specify the model and demonstrates
that our approach is able to retrieve the population parameters in the case of a sample that
perfectly represents the population. Moreover, we evaluate the finite sample performance
of our approach. Next, we illustrate our approach by an empirical example that shows that
the results of our approach are similar to those of other approaches to study structural
equation models with common factors and composites. Finally, we conclude with a
discussion on the advantages and limitations of our approach.

Extant Approaches to Study Common Factors and Composites in a Structural
                                     Equation Model

       Traditionally, SEM deals with constructs modeled as common factors. This type of
SEM has a long tradition and remains the default in many disciplines. Its origins lie in the
introduction of factor analysis (Spearman, 1904) and path analysis (Wright, 1934). Its
popularity increased due to the work of Karl G. Jöreskog (1969, 1970) and the introduction
of the software LISREL (Jöreskog & Sörbom, 1993). Detailed overviews of SEM’s history
can be found in Tarka (2017) and Bollen et al. (2022). In contrast, the groundwork to
studying constructs as linear combinations of observed variables, i.e., as composites, was
laid in the 1980s (e.g., Fornell & Bookstein, 1982; Wold, 1982). Initially, composites were
primarily seen as a means for dimension reduction, and researchers did not ascribe any
conceptual unity to the components of a composite (Bollen & Bauldry, 2011). This
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                             9


perspective shifted with the advent of theoretical frameworks that provided a rationale for
modeling constructs using composites (Diamantopoulos & Winklhofer, 2001; Fornell &
Bookstein, 1982; Henseler, 2017; Henseler & Schuberth, 2020a; Rigdon, 2012; Sarstedt
et al., 2016), alongside the formal establishment of the composite model (Dijkstra, 2013,
2017).

         Due to the growing awareness of different ways of modeling constructs, several
approaches to deal with structural equation models containing both common factors and
composites have been presented. These can be divided into (i) approaches developed
outside the traditional SEM framework and (ii) model specifications aimed at
incorporating composites into the traditional SEM framework. The following two
subsections discuss these approaches, including their advantages and disadvantages.

Approaches to Analyse Structural Equation Models Involving Common Factors
and Composites Developed Outside the Traditional SEM Framework

         The first approach for handling common factors and composites in structural
equation models involves using estimators specifically designed for this purpose. This
category includes methods such as PLSc, GSCA, SVD-SEM, and RML-SEM.

         PLS-PM is arguably the most widely employed estimator for composite models. It
is a two-step procedure (Lohmöller, 1989; Wold, 1975). In the first step, weights are
estimated using the iterative partial least squares algorithm, and are then used to
construct composites. In the second step, relationships between the composites are
estimated. However, when PLS-PM is applied to models containing common factors, it
leads to inconsistent parameter estimates (Dijkstra, 1983; Hui & Wold, 1982). To address
this issue, PLSc was introduced (Dijkstra & Henseler, 2015a, 2015b). PLSc corrects for
attenuation bias when common factors are present, offering consistent parameter estimates
for models that include both composites and common factors (Schuberth et al., 2018b).
Despite this advantage, PLS-PM and PLSc are limited in several regards. There is little
flexibility in specifying models (Schuberth, Zaza, & Henseler, 2023). Specifically, only some
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                               10


error correlations can be freed (Rademaker et al., 2019) and PLS-PM and PLSc do not
allow researchers to impose constraints on model parameters (Schuberth, Zaza, & Henseler,
2023). Finally, no closed-form expression for the standard errors have been derived and
thus statistical inference for PLS-PM and PLSc relies on bootstrap which increases
computational time.

       As an alternative to PLS-PM, GSCA has been proposed (Hwang & Takane, 2004,
2014). GSCA originally estimates models with composites by minimizing the sum of
squared residuals using an alternating least squares algorithm. Similar to PLS-PM, GSCA
produces inconsistent parameter estimates for models involving common factors (Henseler,
2012). To address this issue, GSCA with uniqueness terms for accommodating
measurement error was introduced (Hwang et al., 2017). In addition, for models containing
both common factors and composites, Integrated GSCA (Hwang, Cho, Jung, et al., 2021)
can be used to obtain consistent parameter estimates. While these approaches offer
flexibility in model specification, they remain limited in terms of model assessment due to
their reliance on bootstrap for inference and the limited availability of overall model fit
assessment criteria.

       Moreover, SVD-SEM has been proposed as an alternative to PLS-PM (Tenenhaus
et al., 2025). This is a non-iterative approach, that aligns with the framework proposed by
Dhaene and Rosseel (2023) on non-iterative estimators in the structural after measurement
(SAM, Rosseel & Loh, 2024) approach to SEM. Starting from a correlation matrix,
SVD-SEM yields parameters that are consistent and asymptotically normal through a
series of singular value decompositions. This approach produces standardized parameter
estimates only.

       Finally, RML-SEM has been introduced (Tenenhaus et al., 2025). This approach
estimates model parameters by minimizing the fit function for structural equation models
involving common factors (Jöreskog, 1969), under the constraint that all composites and
common factors have a unit variance. However, this approach comes with several
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                             11


disadvantages. First, only standardized estimates can be obtained for the structural
parameters. Second, this approach relies on constrained maximum likelihood estimation,
which inherently increases computational time. Finally, it is not implemented in any
readily available software.

       Despite these advancements, these approaches were developed outside the
traditional SEM framework. Consequently, developments in the traditional SEM
framework cannot be directly applied, such as conducting comprehensive model
assessments, handling missing data, and model comparisons.

Model Specifications to Accommodate Common Factors and Composites in the
Traditional SEM Framework

       Next to approaches that emerged outside the traditional SEM framework,
approaches have been developed that allow for integrating composites into the traditional
SEM framework. Consequently, these approaches can deal with models that include both
composites and common factors.

       In the classical one-step approach (Grace & Bollen, 2008), a composite is modeled
as a formatively measured latent variable whose error term variance is fixed to zero.
Consequently, the latent variable is entirely composed of its indicators, i.e., it is a
composite. This specification restricts composites to independent positions in the
structural model and prohibits the estimation of covariances between the composite and
other variables (Schuberth, 2023). This limitation can be partly addressed by modeling the
effects of other variables on the composite via its indicators (Schamberger et al.,
forthcoming). Yet, this significantly increases the number of model parameters and
therefore reduces the degrees of freedom.

       Another approach to study composites in SEM is the pseudo-indicator approach
(Rose et al., 2019). This approach exploits the idea that instead of modeling a composite
as a weighted linear combination of its indicators, one indicator can be expressed as the
difference between the composite and other indicators. However, this method currently
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                               12


lacks a mechanism for freely estimating composite weights.

       The Henseler–Ogasawara (H–O) specification (Henseler, 2021; Schuberth, 2023; Yu
et al., 2023) overcomes the limitations of the pseudo-indicator and the one-step approach..
This specification extracts as many composites as there are indicators and expresses the
relationships between composites and indicators using composite loadings. Although
promising, the H–O specification has several limitations. First, it increases specification
complexity by introducing additional variables. Second, it specifies composites in terms of
composite loadings, which contradicts the definition of these constructs. Consequently, the
actual model parameters of interest, i.e., the composite weights, variances, and covariances
between the corresponding indicators, must be derived from the estimated model
parameters after estimation. As a result, restricting composite weights is not
straightforward (Henseler, Yu, et al., 2025) and even more challenging for composite
indicators’ variances and covariances. Third, applying this specification in traditional SEM
software requires the use of several tricks, such as fixing measurement error variances to
zero and finding appropriate starting values. Together, these points often lead to
convergence issues, and increased computational time.

       In conclusion, current approaches for handling composites and common factors in
structural equation models face limitations regarding model specification, identification,
and assessment. To fully leverage the capabilities of traditional SEM, we need to address
these limitations.


     Structural Equation Modeling with Common Factors and Composites


       This section introduces FC-SEM, a new approach to incorporate common factors
and composites in the traditional SEM framework. Specifically, we present how to specify
the model and we derive the model-implied variance-covariance matrix. We further
demonstrate how to ensure model identification. Finally, we demonstrate how to estimate
and assess the models with approaches developed in the traditional SEM framework.
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                                13


Model Specification

       SEM centers on the structural equation model, a statistical model that represents
relationships among variables using linear structural equations. In empirical studies, it is
usually a formalized representation of researchers’ conceptual understanding of the real
world. We will demonstrate how to specify structural equation models that incorporate
both composites and common factors. For simplicity, we assume that each variable has a
mean of zero. Any structural equation model can be divided into two components: (i) the
models that contain relations between constructs and their indicators, and (ii) the model
that relates the constructs, i.e., the structural model. We will introduce both models in the
following.

       In the case of common factors and composites, we have two models that relate the
constructs with their indicators as shown in the following equations:


                                       y f = Λf η f + εf                                      (1)

                                        ηc = W ′yc                                            (2)


where y f is a (P f × 1) random vector of the indicators related to the common factors,
which are comprised in the (M f × 1) random vector η f . Consequently, y f is referred to as
common factor indicators. Further, the (P f × 1) random vector εf comprises the random
measurement errors of the common factor indicators, which are assumed to be uncorrelated
with η f and η c . Similarly, y c is a (P c × 1) random vector of the indicators related to the
composites, which are comprised in the (M c × 1) random vector η c . Thus, this type of
indicators is referred to as composite indicators. The (P f × M f ) matrix Λf contains the
effects of the common factors on their indicators, commonly referred to as factor loadings
and the (P c × M c ) matrix W contains the contributions of the composite indicators to the
composites, i.e., the composite weights.

       While the variances and covariances among common factor indicators are explained
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                                        14


by the common factor and the random measurement errors, the variances of the composite
indicators are unrestricted, as are the covariances between indicators that form a specific
composite. These unrestricted variances and covariances are captured in the (P c × P c )
matrix T which is defined as follows:
               
               cov(yic , yjc )      if the two indicators yic and yjc form the same composite
               
               
               
       Tij =                                                                                           (3)
               
               0                    otherwise.
               
               



         Next to the relations between the constructs and their indicators, constructs are
allowed to be related with each other. These relations are expressed in the structural
model:


                                  η = Bη + ζ      ⇔        η = (I − B)−1 ζ,                            (4)


where the (M × 1) vector η captures the common factors and composites, the (M × M )
matrix B contains the relations between the constructs, and the (M × 1) random vector ζ
contains the structural error terms2 which are assumed to be uncorrelated with εf .
Moreover, relations between constructs and observed variables which do not serve as
indicators for a common factor or a composite, i.e. covariates, can be modeled. To do so,
these observed variables, which are comprised in the random vector x, can be modeled as
single-indicator common factors where the indicators have no measurement error and the
factor loadings are set to 1. Consequently, they are just special cases of the common factor
model and can also be subsumed in y f .

Model Implications - The Model-Implied Variance-Covariance Matrix

         A core principle of traditional SEM is that indicator variances and covariances are
modeled in terms of the model parameters. This can be done by using implications of the

2
  If the construct ηi is not explained by other variables in the structural model, the corresponding
structural error term ζi is equal to the construct ηi . We further assume that I − B has full rank.
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                             15


model specification on the variables’ variances and covariances. Consequently, we derive
the model-implied variance-covariance matrix of the indicators.

       For common factor indicators as depicted in Equation (1), the model-implied
variance-covariance matrix is well established (e.g., Bollen, 1989):


                                                             ′
                            V (y f ) = Σ(θ)f = Λf V(η f )Λl + Θf ,                          (5)


where Θf represents the variance-covariance matrix of the measurement errors εf and
V(η f ) represents the variance-covariance matrix of the common factors.

       In the composite model, the variances and covariances of composite indicators
forming a specific composite are free model parameters and are comprised in the matrix T .
In contrast, the composites’ variances are determined within the model and given by the
diagonal elements of W ′ T W . To obtain the covariances between common factor indicators
and composite indicators and the covariances between composite indicators which form
different composites, we derive so called composite loadings, i.e., coefficients from an
ordinary least squares regression of the composites on their directly related indicators:


                                   y c = Λc η c                                             (6)

                                   Λc = T W (W ′ T W )−1 ,                                  (7)


where T W captures the covariances between the composites and their related indicators
and the matrix W ′ T W is a diagonal matrix containing the composite variances. We show
the derivation of Equation (7) in the Appendix. Consequently, the model-implied
variance-covariance matrix for a model solely containing composites can be derived as:


                                                   ′                   ′
                    V (y c ) = Σ(θ)c = Λc V(η c )Λc − Λc W ′ T W Λc + T                     (8)
                                                   ′
                                     = Λc V(η c )Λc + Θc .                                  (9)
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                                   16


Where the matrix Θc is included to take into account that the variances of the composite
indicators and covariances between composite indicators forming one specific composite are
unrestricted and given by T . Note that in contrast to the common factor model, the
matrix Θc is not a variance-covariance matrix.


       Further, using the relations of the structural model, see Equation (4), the
variance-covariance matrix of η is derived in the following equation:


                              V(η) = (I − B)−1 V(ζ)(I − B)′−1 .                                  (10)


As the composites are dependent variables in the composite model, it needs to be taken
into account that the variances of the composites are also determined via their relations
with the indicators. To combine the restrictions of the composite model and the structural
model, the variances of the composites given by the last M c diagonal elements in Equation
(10) must be set equal to the diagonal elements of W ′ T W . Consequently, the variances of
the structural error terms related to composites are not free parameters, but functions of
the remaining model parameters.


       If we combine the constraints of all parts of the model, we can derive the
model-implied variance-covariance matrix of the indicators. To do so, we make use of the
following equation:
                                                                       
                                   f           f              f           f
                              y  Λ              0  η          ε 
                               =                             +                           (11)
                                                               
                                  yc           0   Λc        ηc           0


By combining y f and y c into a single vector, i.e. y = (y f , y c )′ , we can write this more
compactly as:


                                               y = Λη + ε                                        (12)
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                                       17


Subsequently, the model-implied variance-covariance matrix of the indicators is given by:


                                          Σ(θ) = ΛV(η)Λ′ + Θ,                                       (13)

                                            
                                      f
                                 Θ        0
where we define Θ as:3 Θ =                   with Θc = T − Λc W ′ T W Λc′ . Note that the
                                            
                               0 Θc
model-implied variance-covariance matrix strongly resembles the one known from the
traditional SEM framework.

Model Identification

        In this section, we present the necessary conditions for identifying a structural
equation model with both composites and common factors. Ensuring that the model
parameters are identified is crucial because otherwise the results cannot be interpreted
reliably, as re-estimating the same model with identical data can produce entirely different
results (Bollen, 1989).
        The first necessary condition for identification is adhering to the t rule, which
requires that the degrees of freedom are greater than or equal to zero (Bollen & Davis,
2009). The degrees of freedom are defined as the difference between the number of the
non-redundant variances and covariances of the indicators and the number of the model
parameters K:


                                      df = (P · (P + 1))/2 − K                                      (14)


For a model with both composites and common factors, the model parameters are given by:

    • The non-redundant elements in Θf , i.e., the free (co)variances of the measurement
      errors

    • The non-redundant elements in T , i.e., the free (co)variances of the composite

3
  Note that covariances between composite indicators and measurement errors could in principle be defined
via the off-diagonal blocks.
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                              18


      indicators

  • The free factor loadings in Λf

  • The free composite weights in W

  • The free directed relations between constructs in B

  • The free variances of the structural error terms, i.e., the respective M f main diagonal
      elements in V (ζ)

  • The free covariances of the structural error terms, i.e., the off-diagonal elements in
      V (ζ)

       Ensuring model identification further requires that all sub-models – common factor
model, composite model, and structural model – are identified. For the structural model,
traditional SEM rules apply. We refer to Bollen and Davis (2009) and O’Brien (1994) for
further discussion.

       Similarly, we can rely on the rules known from the traditional SEM framework for
identification of the common factor model. Scaling each common factor is crucial. For this
purpose, several scaling methods have been proposed (e.g., Klopp & Klößner, 2021), e.g.,
fixing one loading per common factor, or fixing the variances of the common factors.
Additional identification rules are discussed in Bollen (1989).

       For the composite model, scaling of the composites is necessary. Our model permits
alternative scaling methods. Specifically, composites can be scaled by fixing one weight,
fixing the variances of composites, or imposing other restrictions on the weights, such as
constraining their sum. Additionally, a composite needs to be related to at least one other
variable not forming the composite (Dijkstra, 2017). This is because the variances and
covariances of observed variables making up a composite are free parameters, and thus, an
isolated composite would have a negative number of degrees of freedom unless all weights
are pre-specified.
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                              19


       To conclude, identifying a structural equation model that includes both composites
and common factors involves applying traditional SEM rules for common factor and
structural models and ensuring that the composite model is identified through proper
scaling and relating the composites to other variables (or fixing all composite weights).

Model Estimation

       Once a structural equation model is specified and all parameters are identified, we
can proceed to estimate the model parameters. Our proposed model specification, along
with its model-implied variance-covariance matrix, enables us to directly apply established
methods from the traditional SEM framework for this purpose. Consequently, estimation
of structural equation models involving composites and common factors is conducted in the
same manner as the estimation of structural equation models with common factors only.

       In the traditional SEM framework, the model parameters are estimated by
minimizing the discrepancy between the model-implied (see Equation 13) and the sample
variance-covariance matrix of the indicators. For this purpose, various optimization
criteria, such as weighted least squares (WLS, Browne, 1984), generalized least squares
(GLS, Jöreskog & Goldberger, 1972), two-stage least squares (2SLS, Bollen, 1996), and ML
(Jöreskog, 1969, 1970) can be used. ML is the most widely used approach, likely due to its
capabilities, such as handling missing values, and the fact that it is the default method in
most SEM software packages. Therefore, we show in the following how to obtain ML
parameter estimates for our presented model specification. For this purpose, we
additionally assume that the observed variables are normally distributed, i.e.,
y ∼ N (0, Σ(θ)). The ML estimates are obtained by maximizing the log likelihood function
(Lawley & Maxwell, 1963):

                         1 h                        i  N ·P
                log L = − n log|Σ(θ)| + tr(SΣ(θ)−1 ) −      · log(2 · π)                    (15)
                         2                              2

Maximizing the log likelihood function is equivalent to minimizing the following
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                           20


discrepancy function:


                         F = log|Σ(θ)| + tr(SΣ(θ)−1 ) − log|S| − P,                      (16)


where the constants log|S| and P are included to obtain a value of 0 for F if Σ(θ̂) equals
S. The results for the remaining estimators can be obtained by optimizing their respective
criterion.

Model Assessment

       Employing traditional SEM estimators, including ML, WLS, and GLS, not only
provides consistent, asymptotically unbiased and efficient estimates (Davidson &
MacKinnon, 1993), but also provides various model assessment options. Specifically, all
analytic robust and non-robust standard errors and test statistics developed in the
traditional SEM framework (Savalei & Rosseel, 2021) can be used for assessing individual
parameter estimates.

       In addition to assessing individual parameter estimates, our approach allows us to
use traditional SEM methods to assess the overall model fit and determine whether the
model is consistent with the collected data. For example, the χ2 test (Jöreskog, 1969;
Wilks, 1938) can be used to test the following null hypothesis:


                                       H0 : Σ(θ) = Σ                                     (17)


where Σ is the population variance-covariance matrix of the observed variables y. The test
statistic is obtained as follows (Jöreskog, 1969; Wilks, 1938):


                                        χ2 = n · F (θ̂),                                 (18)


where F is the fit function and the sample size is denoted by n. This test statistic is under
the null hypothesis of perfect fit asymptotically χ2 distributed with df degrees of freedom
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                                        21


as given in Equation (14).

        The χ2 test can be used to test exact fit. To evaluate close fit instead, researchers
can use fit indices such as the standardized root mean squared residual (SRMR, Jöreskog
& Sörbom, 1988) or the root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA, Browne &
Cudeck, 1992). For a detailed overview of these fit indices and their interpretation, we refer
to Hu and Bentler (1999) and Schermelleh-Engel et al. (2003).

                                    Implementation in lavaan

        In this section, we explain the implementation of FC-SEM in the open-source
software R (R Core Team, 2020) package lavaan (version 0.6-20 Rosseel, 2012; Rosseel
et al., 2025). This package is very popular in the field of SEM and is frequently used in
practice (Jorgensen, 2017). Generally, the analysis of structural equation models involving
composites and common factors follows a procedure similar to the analysis of models
involving only common factors. Specifically, the same functions are applicable, and there is
no need to modify the model syntax for the structural and common factor models. In the
following, we briefly outline the necessary adaptations for integrating composites.

        To incorporate composites in the lavaan syntax, the operator ‘<∼’ is used, with the
composite specified on the left side and the composite indicators connected via ‘+’
operators.4 By default, composites are scaled, setting the weight of the first indicator per
composite to one. This is similar to the default scaling method for common factors.

        The sem() function can be used to obtain the parameter estimates. To obtain the
standardized parameter estimates, the standardized argument can be set to ‘TRUE’ in
the summary() function. Standardized parameter estimates are particularly useful for
comparisons with PLSc results, as PLSc estimates are usually standardized. By default,
the composite indicator (co)variances are fixed to their sample statistics.

        The current implementation (lavaan 0.6-20) has some limitations. Firstly, while

4
  Note that in earlier package versions, the <∼ operator was used to specify a formatively measured latent
variable whose error term variance is fixed to zero.
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                              22


standardized parameter estimates can be obtained, scaling constructs to have unit variance
during the estimation procedure is not yet supported when composites are involved.
Secondly, due to the absence of an analytical gradient, the option optim.gradient must
be set to "numerical" during optimization. Lastly, the current implementation does not
yet support mean structures. Nevertheless, these limitations are expected to be addressed
in future updates.

                 Scenario Analysis And Finite Sample Performance

       In this section, we demonstrate our approach to SEM with common factors and
composites through a scenario analysis. Specifically, we illustrate how to specify the model,
how to derive the model-implied variance-covariance matrix, how to identify the model
parameters, and how to calculate the degrees of freedom. Moreover, we demonstrate that
our approach can retrieve the population parameters when the data perfectly represents
the population. In this case, evaluating the overall model fit is not informative, as it would
inevitably indicate a perfect fit. Finally, we evaluate the finite sample behavior of our
approach.5

       We consider a population model with four constructs η1 , η2 , η3 , and η4 . The
constructs η1 and η2 are modeled as common factors, while the constructs η3 and η4 are
modeled as composites. With this population model, our approach can be illustrated in the
most general, but also most simple case. The population model is illustrated in Figure 3.

       The two common factors η1 and η2 are measured by three observed variables:


                y1 = 1 · η 1 + ε 1 ;   y2 = 0.8 · η1 + ε2 ;   y3 = 0.9 · η1 + ε3            (19)

                y4 = 1 · η 2 + ε 4 ;   y5 = 0.7 · η2 + ε5 ;   y6 = 0.8 · η2 + ε6 .          (20)


The measurement errors are assumed to be uncorrelated with a variance of 0.5 each.

5
  The R code is available via the following link:
https://osf.io/9tm2y/?view_only=59d9792bab994892a735e4efc763b511
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                                        23


Additionally, the random measurement errors are assumed to be uncorrelated with the
common factors and the composites. The composites η3 and η4 are related to their
indicators as follows:


                              η3 = 1 · y7 + 0.4 · y8 + 0.6 · y9                                       (21)

                              η4 = 1 · y10 + 0.2 · y11 + 0.5 · y12 + 0.3 · y13 .                      (22)


The variance-covariance matrices of the indicators forming a composite are given by:
                                                                                               
                                                                             7.0   0.9 0.5 1.2
                                      
                       6.0   2.0 1.2                                                          
                                                                             0.9   3.0 0.7   1.8
                                                                                                
                                      
   V (y7 , y8 , y9 ) = 
                       2.0   5.0      ;
                                    1.5        V (y10 , y11 , y12 , y13 ) =                         (23)
                                                                                              
                                                                                                 .
                                                                             0.5   0.7 2.0   0.5
                                                                                                
                                      
                       1.2 1.5 2.0
                                                                                              
                                                                                                
                                                                               1.2 1.8 0.5 5.0
                                                                                                



The structural model is specified as:


                                 η4 = 0.6 · η1 + 0.5 · η3 + ζ4                                        (24)

                                 η2 = 0.2 · η1 + 0.1 · η3 + 0.3 · η4 + ζ2 .                           (25)


Here, ζ2 and ζ4 are uncorrelated, uncorrelated with η1 , and η3 , and ζ2 has a variance of 1.5.
The variance of η1 is set to 2.0, and the covariance between η1 and η3 is 0.1. The
population variance-covariance matrix and its derivation is provided in the Appendix.




       To evaluate the performance of our approach in the case where the sample perfectly
represents the population, we draw a sample of 200 observations that exactly represents
this population, i.e., the sample variance-covariance matrix of the observed variables equals
the population counterpart, from the multivariate normal distribution using the R package
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                                                 24


lavaan. Subsequently, we specify the common factor model as:
                                                                            
                               y1  λ1                  0        ε1 
                                                                 
                                                         0
                                                                 
                               y   λ                            ε 
                                2   2                             2
                                                            
                                                         0
                                                                 
                               y   λ
                                                             η1  ε3 
                                                                     
                                3   3
                                =                          +  .
                                     0
                                                            
                               y                       λ4 
                                                             η2
                                                                    ε 
                                4                                 4
                                                                 
                                     0
                                                                 
                               y                       λ5 
                                                                   ε 
                                5                                 5
                                                                 
                                                    0
                                                                 
                                   y6                    λ6                 ε6


The composite model is specified as:
                                                                                            
                                                                                   y7 
                                                                                  
                   η3  w7            w8 w9             0         0   0     0 
                                                                                  ...  .
                                                                                        
                    =
                                                                                   

                                   0        0       0
                                                                              
                    η4                                   w10 w11 w12         w13  
                                                                                        
                                                                                   y13


The matrix T is given by:
                                                                                                               
    var(y7 )                                                                                                   
                                                                                                               
   cov(y , y )     var(y8 )
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                
        7 8                                                                                                    
                                                                                                               
   cov(y , y )   cov(y8 , y9 ) var(y9 )
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                
        7 9                                                                                                    
                                                                                                               
T =    0                0              0               var(y10 )
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                .
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                               
        0                0              0           cov(y10 , y11 )     var(y11 )
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                               
        0                0              0           cov(y10 , y12 ) cov(y11 , y12 )          var(y12 )
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                               
           0             0              0           cov(y10 , y13 ) cov(y11 , y13 ) cov(y12 , y13 ) var(y13 )
                                                                                                               


                                                                                                           (26)


Moreover, the matrix Θf contains the variances θii of measurement errors εi on the
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                                         25


diagonal. The variances of the composites are calculated as:
                                                                                  
                          var(y7 )                                         w7 
                                                                         
var(η3 ) = w7 w8         cov(y7 , y8 )           var(y8 )                                             (27)
                                                                           
                      w9                                                   w 
                                                                             8
                                                                           
                                cov(y7 , y9 ) cov(y8 , y9 ) var(y9 )
                                                                           
                                                                                w9
                                                                                                         
                                       var(y10 )                                                  w10 
                                                                                                      
                                     cov(y , y )             var(y11 )
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                  w 
                                            10 11                                                   11 
var(η4 ) = w10 w11 w12
                                      
                                 w13                                                                  .
                                      cov(y , y )           cov(y11 , y12 )         var(y12 )
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                   w 
                                           10 12                                                   12 
                                                                                                      
                                          cov(y10 , y13 ) cov(y11 , y13 ) cov(y12 , y13 ) var(y13 )
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      w13

                                                                                                       (28)


The structural model is expressed as:
                                                                              
                             η1  0             0 0    0  η1   η1 
                                                            
                                                  0 b4
                                                            
                             η   b                    b5 
                                                             η2   ζ2 
                                                                 
                              2   3
                              =                            +  .                                (29)
                                   0             0 0    0
                                                            
                             η 
                                                             η3  η3 
                                                                 
                              3  
                                                            
                                              b1 0 b 2   0
                                                            
                                 η4                               η4            ζ4


The variance of η1 is denoted as ψ11 , the variance of ζ2 is ψ22 , the variance of η3 is given by
Equation (27), the covariance between η1 and η3 is denoted as ψ13 , and the variance of ζ4 is
calculated as:


              var(ζ4 ) = ψ44 = var(η4 ) − b21 var(η1 ) − b22 var(η3 ) − 2b1 b2 cov(η1 , η3 ).          (30)


The model-implied variance-covariance matrix of the indicators can be derived using the
Equations (10) and (13).

       To ensure model identification, we scale the common factors and composites by
setting λ1 , λ4 , w7 , and w10 to 1. The common factor model is identified as each common
factor is scaled and fulfills the two-indicator rule, i.e., each common factor is related to at
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                                                                                       26


least two indicators and the measurement errors are uncorrelated. The composite model is
identified since each composite is scaled and related to at least one other variable next to
its indicators. The structural model is identified as it meets the recursive rule, i.e., the
structural model contains no feedback loops and the structural error terms are uncorrelated
and uncorrelated with η1 and η3 . Furthermore, no indicator is related to more than one
construct. Following this, we calculate the degrees of freedom. It is important to note that,
unlike common factors, the variances of composites are inherently determined within the
model. This applies to composites in both dependent and independent positions in the
structural model. Consequently, as shown in Equations (27) and (28), the variances of the
composites depend on the other model parameters. As a result, the variances of the
structural error terms related to composites, such as ζ4 in this example, are fully
determined by the remaining model parameters, as illustrated in Equation (30). The
degrees of freedom of our example model are calculated as follows:


df =                    91
                       |{z}                         −             6
                                                                 |{z}               −                    16
                                                                                                        |{z}                      −           4
                                                                                                                                             |{z}             −
       Number of non-redundant variances and             Number of free variances            Number of free variances and             Number of free latent
           covariances of the indicators                of the measurement errors       covariances of the composite indicators         variable loadings

             5
            |{z}           −        5
                                   |{z}         −              1
                                                              |{z}              −           1
                                                                                           |{z}             −             1
                                                                                                                         |{z}              = 52 > 0.
        Number of free         Number of free       Number of free variances           Number of free           Number of free variances
       composite weights       elements in B        of structural error terms       construct covariances         of common factors




          Once the model is identified, we can estimate and asses it using the methods known
from the traditional SEM framework. To do so, we make use of the R package lavaan as
explained in the previous section. Specifically, we estimate the parameters using the ML
estimator. Table 1 shows the parameter estimates. Given that the data perfectly represents
the population, all population parameters were retrieved.

          Next, we evaluate the finite sample behavior of our approach. FC-SEM enables us
to use estimators from the traditional SEM framework to estimate model parameters.
Consequently, we do not expect the finite sample behavior of the ML estimator, for
example, to be different when applied to models involving composites and common factors
than when applied to models involving only common factors. To verify this further, we ran
    FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                                 27


    a small Monte Carlo simulation in which we drew 1,000 samples from a multivariate
    normal distribution with a mean vector of zero and the population variance-covariance
    matrix of the indicators, each with a sample size of 500. Table (2) illustrates the average
    parameter estimates and the ratio between the average standard errors and the empirical
    standard deviations of the point estimates across all replications. As expected, the
    parameter estimates are, on average, close to their population counterparts. Moreover,
    most of the average standard errors are close to the empirical standard errors. In summary,
    our approach yields consistent estimates that are, on average, close to their population
    counterparts.

                                         Empirical Example

           In this section, we demonstrate how FC-SEM can be employed in the R package
    lavaan by means of an empirical example. Additionally, we compare the results of our
    approach to those of IGSCA, PLSc, and the H–O specification. For this purpose, we
    employ the American Customer Satisfaction Index dataset, which has recently been
    examined in the context of IGSCA (Hwang et al., 2023) and PLS-PM (Hair et al., 2022).
    The model comprises eight constructs in total, four of which are modeled as composites:
    quality, composed of eight indicators; performance, composed of five indicators; corporate
    social responsibility, composed of five indicators; and attractiveness, composed of three
    indicators. The remaining four constructs are modeled as common factors: competence,
    customer loyalty, and likeability, each with three measures, and customer satisfaction,
    which is measured by a single indicator. For a detailed description of the data, we refer the
    reader to Hair et al. (2022).6
           The first step involves specifying the model in lavaan syntax as illustrated as
    follows:

1   model <- ’

    6
      The R Code used for the empirical example is available via the following link:
    https://osf.io/9tm2y/?view_only=59d9792bab994892a735e4efc763b511. The data is available via Hwang
    et al. (2023).
     FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                                           28


 2   # Specification of the composites
 3   Quality                  <~ qual_1 + qual_2 + qual_3 + qual_4 +
 4                                 qual_5 + qual_6 + qual_7 + qual_8
 5   Performance              <~ perf_1 + perf_2 + perf_3 + perf_4 + perf_5
 6   CorpSocResp              <~ csor_1 + csor_2 + csor_3 + csor_4 + csor_5
 7   Attractiveness <~ attr_1 + attr_2 + attr_3
 8


 9   # Specification of the latent variables
10   Competence                  =~ comp_1 + comp_2 + comp_3
11   CustomerLoyalty             =~ cusl_1 + cusl_2 + cusl_3
12   Likeability                 =~ like_1 + like_2 + like_3
13


14   # Specification of the single indicator latent variable
15   C u s t o m e r S a t i s f a c t i o n =~ cusa
16


17   # Specification of the structural model
18   Competence                         ~ Quality + Performance + CorpSocResp +
19                                          Attractiveness
20   Likeability                        ~ Quality + Performance + CorpSocResp +
21                                          Attractiveness
22   C u s t o m e r S a t i s f a c t i o n ~ Competence + Likeability
23   CustomerLoyalty                    ~ C u s t o m e r S a t i s f a c t i o n + Competence + Likeability
24   ’

     Similar to scaling common factors, the default behavior in lavaan is to scale composites by
     setting the weight of their first indicator to one.
              To conduct our approach to SEM with composites and common factors and
     estimate the model parameters, we utilize the sem() function of the lavaan package:

 1   fit <- sem ( model , data = data , optim . gradient = " numerical " )
 2   summary ( fit , standardized = TRUE , fit . measures = TRUE )

     Per default, the ML estimator is used to obtain parameter estimates. Table 3 shows the
     standardized parameter estimates produced by our approach. For simplicity, we only report
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                             29


the parameter estimates of the loadings of the indicators related to likeability, the weights
to form attractiveness, and the structural model for customer loyalty. The remaining model
parameters along with the summary output can be found in the supplementary material.
Additionally, we report the results of IGSCA (using GSCAPro, Hwang, Cho, & Choo,
2021), PLSc (using the R package cSEM, Rademaker & Schuberth, 2020) and the H–O
specification (using the ML estimator as implemented in the package lavaan).

       Table 3 shows that the standardized parameter estimates are similar among the
different approaches. While the results of PLSc and IGSCA differ slightly from those of our
approach due to the different estimation algorithms, the results of the H–O specification
are almost identical to the results of our approach. To conclude, the results of our proposed
approach to SEM with common factors and composites are similar to those of other
approaches to study such models, enabling researchers to draw comparable conclusions.

                                        Discussion

       In this study, we introduce an approach to study structural equation models
involving composites and common factors which allows us to derive a closed form
expression for the variance-covariance matrix implied by such models. Additionally, we
present the necessary conditions for identifying the model parameters. This specification
along with its model-implied variance-covariance matrix allow us to apply approaches to
model estimation and assessment developed in the traditional SEM framework. We refer to
our approach as factor- and composite-based SEM, i.e., FC-SEM.

       We demonstrate the necessity of our approach by addressing the limitations of
existing methods used to analyze structural equation models incorporating both common
factors and composites. Specifically, our approach overcomes the limitations of approaches
developed outside the traditional SEM framework, such as PLSc, IGSCA, SVD-SEM, and
RML-SEM. First, unlike PLSc, our approach allows us to restrict model parameters,
enabling us to incorporate prior knowledge. Second, unlike PLSc, IGSCA, and SVD-SEM,
our approach allows for the analytic derivation of standard errors, so inference on the
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                            30


model parameter estimates does not have to rely on non-parametric methods such as
bootstrap. Therefore, our approach can decrease computational time and enables the
analytic derivation of the corresponding statistical properties. Third, our approach enables
the estimation of both standardized and unstandardized parameter estimates, as
composites are not restricted to having a unit variance, overcoming limitations in PLSc,
SVD-SEM, and RML-SEM. Fourth, our approach allows for different scaling methods, so it
does not rely on constrained optimization, as is done in RML-SEM. Finally, our approach
enables researchers to apply developments of the traditional SEM framework, such as
model fit assessment and handling missing values, directly to models involving common
factors and composites. In contrast, such enhancements require additional effort for PLSc,
IGSCA, SVD-SEM, and RML-SEM as researchers must develop new methods for these
estimators instead of relying on existing methods.


       Moreover, our approach overcomes the limitations of model specifications for
structural equation models involving common factors and composites designed so that they
can be incorporated in the traditional SEM framework. Specifically, it overcomes the
limitations of the one-step approach, the pseudo-indicator approach, and the H-O
specification. First, our approach addresses the shortcomings of the one-step approach by
allowing composites to be included in dependent and independent positions of the
structural model. Consequently, composites can also be explained by other constructs, and
particularly mediation analysis with composites as mediators or outcome variables is
feasible. Second, we overcome the limitations of the pseudo-indicator approach by allowing
composite weights to be freely estimated. Thus, weights can be obtained optimally within
the model instead of outside the model framework. Finally, FC-SEM overcomes the H-O
specification’s limitations in terms of model specification. Specifically, with the H-O
specification, researchers must specify the composites in terms of composite loadings by
introducing additional variables. Furthermore, to apply the H-O specification using
traditional SEM software, researchers must restrict parameters, such as measurement
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                                  31


errors related to composite indicators, to zero and adjust the starting values for model
parameters related to the additional variables. Additionally, due to the more complicated
model specification, traditional SEM software tends to experience more convergence issues
when the H-O specification is employed (Schamberger et al., forthcoming). Finally, the
actual parameters of a composite model – i.e., the composite weights, indicator variances,
and indicator covariances – are no direct model parameters in the H-O specification.
Rather, they must be derived from the model parameters obtained by this specification.
This complicates the inference and restriction of these parameters. In summary, our
approach surpasses existing methods for analyzing structural equation models involving
composites and common factors in terms of model specification, identification, assessment,
and application of traditional SEM approaches. Further, our approach offers more
flexibility in terms of model specification by, e.g., allowing for specifying cross-weights or
covariances between composite indicators and measurement errors. A detailed comparison
of the capabilities of the different approaches is given in Table 4.



       To demonstrate our approach, we conducted a scenario analysis using a sample
accurately representing the population. This scenario analysis confirmed that our approach
to SEM with common factors and composites employing the ML estimator can retrieve the
population parameters in such a scenario. Moreover, a small simulation study confirmed
that FC-SEM when using the ML estimator yields parameter estimates that are, on
average, close to the population counterparts in finite samples. Additionally, we presented
an empirical example to illustrate our method and demonstrate how it can be applied using
the open-source R package lavaan. We further compared the results of our approach with
those of other methods for estimating structural equation models involving composites and
common factors. This comparison demonstrates that the standardized parameter estimates
are similar among the approaches.

       We have demonstrated that our approach allows for reliance on approaches
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                               32


developed in the traditional SEM framework in terms of model estimation and model
assessment. Subsequently, conclusions about these approaches, e.g., in terms of
performance in finite samples, can be transferred to our approach. Furthermore, our model
specification allows us to apply developments of the traditional SEM framework such as
handling missing data, multi-group analysis, and examining mediation effects. Future
research should explore the performance of these techniques for our approach in more
detail. Generally, assessing the overall model fit is well explored for structural equation
models involving only common factors. However, some of the criteria are not well suited to
assess models involving composites (Henseler, Schuberth, et al., 2025; Schuberth, 2021).
Specifically, measures for assessing validity or reliability are designed for common factors,
limiting their applicability for composite models. Currently, research on the use of model
fit criteria for composite models is rather limited (Hwang et al., 2023; Schuberth,
Rademaker, & Henseler, 2023). Future research should elaborate more on the applicability
and interpretability of different model assessment criteria for structural equation models
with common factors and composites. Additionally, new criteria should be developed to
assess such models. Moreover, currently indicators are restricted to be either composite or
common factor indicators. Future research should elaborate on including indicators as
measures for common factors and indicators of composites simultaneously. Further,
currently our approach is only implemented in the open-source software lavaan which
currently limits its availability to R users. Future research hopefully integrates it in other
software packages. Finally, it is crucial to investigate the assumption that composite
indicators are free from measurement error. Given the likelihood of measurement errors in
empirical research, strategies to incorporate and address such errors within our framework
should be developed.


       In conclusion, our approach significantly broadens the applicability of SEM for
studying structural equation models involving composites and common factors, making it
more accessible and practical for a wider research audience.
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                33


Open Practices Statement: The R code used for the scenario analysis, for the
simulation and for the empirical example are available via:
https://osf.io/9tm2y/?view_only=59d9792bab994892a735e4efc763b511
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                             34


                                        References

Bollen, K. A. (1989). Structural equations with latent variables. John Wiley & Sons Inc.
Bollen, K. A. (1996). An alternative two stage least squares (2SLS) estimator for latent
       variable equations. Psychometrika, 61 (1), 109–121.
       https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02296961
Bollen, K. A., & Bauldry, S. (2011). Three Cs in measurement models: Causal indicators,
       composite indicators, and covariates. Psychological Methods, 16 (3), 265–284.
       https://doi.org/10.1037/a0024448
Bollen, K. A., & Davis, W. R. (2009). Causal indicator models: Identification, estimation,
       and testing. Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 16 (3),
       498–522. https://doi.org/10.1080/10705510903008253
Bollen, K. A., Fisher, Z., Lilly, A., Brehm, C., Luo, L., Martinez, A., & Ye, A. (2022). Fifty
       years of structural equation modeling: A history of generalization, unification, and
       diffusion. Social Science Research, 107, 102769.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssresearch.2022.102769
Browne, M. W. (1984). Asymptotically distribution-free methods for the analysis of
       covariance structures. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology,
       37 (1), 62–83. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8317.1984.tb00789.x
Browne, M. W. (1974). Generalized least squares estimators in the analysis of covariance
       structures. South African Statistical Journal, 8 (1), 1–24.
       https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2333-8504.1973.tb00197.x
Browne, M. W., & Cudeck, R. (1992). Alternative ways of assessing model fit. Sociological
       Methods & Research, 21 (2), 230–258. https://doi.org/10.1177/0049124192021002005
Chen, W., Gao, Y., Ren, R., Bi, Y., & Liao, Y. (2025). Socioeconomic status and internet
       addiction: Double-mediated moderation. BMC Public Health, 25 (1).
       https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-024-21153-w
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                             35


Cho, G., Hwang, H., & Sarstedt, M. (2022). A comparative evaluation of factor- and
       component-based structural equation modeling approaches under (in)correct
       construct representations. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical
       Psychology, 75 (2), 220–251. https://doi.org/10.1111/bmsp.12255
Davidson, R., & MacKinnon, J. G. (1993). Estimation and inference in econometrics.
       Oxford University Press.
Dhaene, S., & Rosseel, Y. (2023). An evaluation of non-iterative estimators in the
       structural after measurement (SAM) approach to structural equation modeling
       (SEM). Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 30 (6), 926–940.
       https://doi.org/10.1080/10705511.2023.2220135
Diamantopoulos, A., & Winklhofer, H. M. (2001). Index construction with formative
       indicators: An alternative to scale development. Journal of Marketing Research,
       38 (2), 269–277. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkr.38.2.269.18845
Dijkstra, T. K. (1983). Some comments on maximum likelihood and partial least squares
       methods. Journal of Econometrics, 22, 67–90.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-4076(83)90094-5
Dijkstra, T. K. (2013). Composites as factors, generalized canonical variables revisited.
       Working Paper. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.1.3426.5449
Dijkstra, T. K. (2017). A perfect match between a model and a mode. In H. Latan &
       R. Noonan (Eds.), Partial least squares path modeling (pp. 55–80). Springer Verlag.
Dijkstra, T. K., & Henseler, J. (2015a). Consistent and asymptotically normal PLS
       estimators for linear structural equations. Computational Statistics & Data
       Analysis, 81, 10–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csda.2014.07.008
Dijkstra, T. K., & Henseler, J. (2015b). Consistent partial least squares path modeling.
       MIS Quarterly, 39 (2), 29–316. https://doi.org/10.25300/MISQ/2015/39.2.02
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                             36


Edwards, J. R., & Bagozzi, R. P. (2000). On the nature and direction of relationships
       between constructs and measures. Psychological Methods, 5 (2), 155.
       https://doi.org/10.1037/1082-989X.5.2.155
Fornell, C., & Bookstein, F. L. (1982). Two structural equation models: LISREL and PLS
       applied to consumer exit-voice theory. Journal of Marketing Research, 19 (4),
       440–452. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022243782019004
Gerino, E., Rollè, L., Sechi, C., & Brustia, P. (2017). Loneliness, resilience, mental health,
       and quality of life in old age: A structural equation model. Frontiers in Psychology,
       8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.02003
Grace, J. B., & Bollen, K. A. (2008). Representing general theoretical concepts in
       structural equation models: The role of composite variables. Environmental and
       Ecological Statistics, 15, 191–213. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10651-007-0047-7
Graham, J. M. (2008). The general linear model as structural equation modeling. Journal
       of Educational and Behavioral Statistics, 33 (4), 485–506.
       https://doi.org/10.3102/1076998607306151
Hair, G. T. M. H., Joseph F., Ringle, C. M., & Sarstedt, M. (2022). A primer on partial
       least squares structural equation modeling (PLS-SEM) (Third edition). SAGE
       Publications, Incorporated.
Henseler, J. (2012). Why generalized structured component analysis is not universally
       preferable to structural equation modeling. Journal of the Academy of Marketing
       Science, 40, 402–413. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-011-0298-6
Henseler, J. (2017). Bridging design and behavioral research with variance-based structural
       equation modeling. Journal of Advertising, 46 (1), 178–192.
       https://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.2017.1281780
Henseler, J. (2021). Composite-based structural equation modeling: Analyzing latent and
       emergent variables. Guilford Press.
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                               37


Henseler, J., & Schuberth, F. (2020a). Auxiliary theories. In J. Henseler (Ed.),
       Composite-based structural equation modeling: Analyzing latent and emergent
       variables (pp. 25–37). Guilford Press.
Henseler, J., & Schuberth, F. (2020b). Using confirmatory composite analysis to assess
       emergent variables in business research. Journal of Business Research, 120, 147–156.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.07.026
Henseler, J., Schuberth, F., Lee, N., & Kemény, I. (2025). Why researchers should be
       cautious about using PLS-SEM. Industrial Marketing Management.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2024.01.017
Henseler, J., Yu, X., Schamberger, T., Hancock, G. R., & Schuberth, F. (2025). Specifying
       composites in structural equation modeling: Traditional, recent and new
       approaches. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2509.01292
Higgins, G. E. (2002). General theory of crime and deviance: A structural equation
       modeling approach. Journal of Crime and Justice, 25 (2), 71–95.
       https://doi.org/10.1080/0735648X.2002.9721158
Hoyle, R. H., & Gottfredson, N. C. (2023). Structural equation modeling with latent
       variables. In APA handbook of research methods in psychology: Research designs:
       Quantitative, qualitative, neuropsychological, and biological (vol. 2) (2nd ed.).
       (pp. 459–490). American Psychological Association.
       https://doi.org/10.1037/0000319-021
Hu, L.-t., & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure
       analysis: Conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation
       Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 6 (1), 1–55.
       https://doi.org/10.1080/10705519909540118
Hui, B. S., & Wold, H. (1982). Consistency and consistency at large of partial least squares
       estimates. In K. G. Jöreskog & H. Wold (Eds.), Systems under indirect observation:
       Causality, structure, prediction part ii (pp. 119–130). North-Holland.
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                          38


Hult, G. T. M., Ketchen, D. J., Cui, A. S., Prud’homme, A. M., Seggie, S. H.,
       Stanko, M. A., Xu, A. S., & Cavusgil, S. T. (2006). An assessment of the use of
       structural equation modeling in international business research. In Research
       methodology in strategy and management (pp. 385–415, Vol. 3). Emerald.
Hwang, H., Cho, G., & Choo, H. (2021). GSCA Pro version 1.1.
Hwang, H., Cho, G., Jung, K., Falk, C., Flake, J., Jin, M. J., & Lee, S. H. (2021). An
       approach to structural equation modeling with both factors and components:
       Integrated generalized structured component analysis. Psychological Methods, 26 (3),
       273–294. https://doi.org/10.1037/met0000336
Hwang, H., Cho, G., Jung, K., Falk, C. F., Flake, J. K., Jin, M. J., & Lee, S. H. (2020). An
       approach to structural equation modeling with both factors and components:
       Integrated generalized structured component analysis. Psychological Methods, 26 (3),
       273–294. https://doi.org/10.1037/met0000336
Hwang, H., Sarstedt, M., Cho, G., Choo, H., & Ringle, C. M. (2023). A primer on
       integrated generalized structured component analysis. European Business Review,
       35 (3), 261–284. https://doi.org/10.1108/ebr-11-2022-0224
Hwang, H., & Takane, Y. (2004). Generalized structured component analysis.
       Psychometrika, 69 (1), 81–99. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02295841
Hwang, H., & Takane, Y. (2014). Generalized structured component analysis. CRC Press.
Hwang, H., Takane, Y., & Jung, K. (2017). Generalized structured component analysis
       with uniqueness terms for accommodating measurement error. Frontiers in
       Psychology, 8: 2137. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.02137
Jöreskog, K. G. (1969). A general approach to confirmatory maximum likelihood factor
       analysis. Psychometrika, 34 (2), 183–202. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02289343
Jöreskog, K. G. (1970). A general method for estimating a linear structural equation
       system. ETS Research Bulletin Series, 1970 (2), i–41.
       https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2333-8504.1970.tb00783.x
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                          39


Jöreskog, K. G., & Goldberger, A. S. (1972). Factor analysis by generalized least squares.
       Psychometrika, 37 (3), 243–260. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF023067820
Jöreskog, K. G., & Sörbom, D. (1988). LISREL 7: A guide to the program and
       applications. SPSS.
Jöreskog, K. G., & Sörbom, D. (1993). LISREL 8: Structural equation modeling with the
       SIMPLIS command language. Scientific Software International; Lawrence Erlbaum
       Associates, Inc.
Jorgensen, T. D. (2017). IMPS 2019 symposium: The lavaan ecosystem.
       https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/BCY78
Klopp, E., & Klößner, S. (2021). The impact of scaling methods on the properties and
       interpretation of parameter estimates in structural equation models with latent
       variables. Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 28 (2),
       182–206. https://doi.org/10.1080/10705511.2020.1796673
Lawley, D. N., & Maxwell, A. E. (1963). Factor analysis as a statistical method.
       Butterworths.
Little, T. D., Cunningham, W. A., Shahar, G., & Widaman, K. F. (2002). To parcel or not
       to parcel: Exploring the question, weighing the merits. Structural Equation
       Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 9 (2), 151–173.
       https://doi.org/10.1207/s15328007sem0902_1
Lohmöller, J.-B. (1989). Latent variable path modeling with partial least squares.
       Physica-Verlag.
MacCallum, R. C., & Austin, J. T. (2000). Applications of structural equation modeling in
       psychological research. Annual Review of Psychology, 51 (1), 201–226.
       https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.51.1.201
McArdle, J. J. (1988). Dynamic but structural equation modeling of repeated measures
       data. In Handbook of multivariate experimental psychology (pp. 561–614). Springer.
       https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4613-0893-5_17
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                              40


O’Brien, R. M. (1994). Identification of simple measurement models with multiple latent
       variables and correlated errors. Sociological Methodology, 24, 137–170.
       https://doi.org/10.2307/270981
R Core Team. (2020). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R
       Foundation for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria.
Rademaker, M. E., & Schuberth, F. (2020). cSEM: Composite-based structural equation
       modeling. https://github.com/M-E-Rademaker/cSEM
Rademaker, M. E., Schuberth, F., & Dijkstra, T. K. (2019). Measurement error correlation
       within blocks of indicators in consistent partial least squares. Internet Research,
       29 (3), 448–463. https://doi.org/10.1108/intr-12-2017-0525
Rai, A., Patnayakuni, R., & Seth, N. (2006). Firm performance impacts of digitally enabled
       supply chain integration capabilities. MIS Quarterly, 30 (2), 225–246.
       https://doi.org/10.2307/25148729
Rhemtulla, M., van Bork, R., & Borsboom, D. (2020). Worse than measurement error:
       Consequences of inappropriate latent variable measurement models. Psychological
       Methods, 25 (1), 30–45. https://doi.org/10.1037/met0000220
Richardson, M. W. (1936). Notes on the rationale of item analysis. Psychometrika, 1 (1),
       69–76. https://doi.org/10.1007/bf02287926
Rigdon, E. E. (2012). Rethinking partial least squares path modeling: In praise of simple
       methods. Long Range Planning, 45 (5), 341–358.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lrp.2012.09.010
Rigdon, E. E. (2016). Choosing PLS path modeling as analytical method in European
       management research: A realist perspective. European Management Journal, 34 (6),
       598–605. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.emj.2016.05.006
Rose, N., Wagner, W., Mayer, A., & Nagengast, B. (2019). Model-based manifest and
       latent composite scores in structural equation models. Collabra: Psychology, 5 (1).
       https://doi.org/10.1525/collabra.143
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                            41


Rosseel, Y. (2012). lavaan: An R package for structural equation modeling. Journal of
       Statistical Software, 48 (2), 1–36. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v048.i02
Rosseel, Y., Jorgensen, T. D., & De Wilde, L. (2025). lavaan: Latent variable analysis [R
       package version 0.6-20]. https://doi.org/10.32614/CRAN.package.lavaan
Rosseel, Y., & Loh, W. W. (2024). A structural after measurement approach to structural
       equation modeling. Psychological Methods, 29 (3), 561–588.
       https://doi.org/10.1037/met0000503
Sarstedt, M., Hair, J. F., Ringle, C. M., Thiele, K. O., & Gudergan, S. P. (2016).
       Estimation issue with PLS and CBSEM: Where the bias lies! Journal of Business
       Research, 69 (10), 3998–4010. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2016.06.007
Savalei, V., & Rosseel, Y. (2021). Computational options for standard errors and test
       statistics with incomplete normal and nonnormal data in SEM. Structural Equation
       Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 29 (2), 163–181.
       https://doi.org/10.1080/10705511.2021.1877548
Schamberger, T. (2022). Methodological advances in composite-based structural equation
       modeling. https://doi.org/10.3990/1.9789036553759
Schamberger, T., Schuberth, F., & Henseler, J. (forthcoming). Moderated mediation with
       composites: The composite moderated structural equations approach. Behavior
       Research Methods.
Schermelleh-Engel, K., Moosbrugger, H., & Müller, H. (2003). Evaluating the fit of
       structural equation models: Tests of significance and descriptive goodness-of-fit
       measures. Methods of Psychological Research, 8 (2), 23–74.
Schuberth, F. (2021). Confirmatory composite analysis using partial least squares: Setting
       the record straight. Review of Managerial Science, 15, 1311–1345.
       https://doi.org/10.1007/s11846-020-00405-0
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                             42


Schuberth, F. (2023). The Henseler-Ogasawara specification of composites in structural
       equation modeling: A tutorial. Psychological Methods, 28 (4), 843–859.
       https://doi.org/10.1037/met0000432
Schuberth, F., Henseler, J., & Dijkstra, T. K. (2018a). Confirmatory composite analysis.
       Frontiers in Psychology, 9:2541. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02541
Schuberth, F., Henseler, J., & Dijkstra, T. K. (2018b). Partial least squares path modeling
       using ordinal categorical indicators. Quality & Quantity, 52 (1), 9–35.
       https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-016-0401-7
Schuberth, F., Hubona, G., Roemer, E., Zaza, S., Schamberger, T., Chuah, F.,
       Cepeda-Carrión, G., & Henseler, J. (2023). The choice of structural equation
       modeling technique matters: A commentary on Dash and Paul (2021). Technological
       Forecasting and Social Change, 194, 122665.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2023.122665
Schuberth, F., Rademaker, M. E., & Henseler, J. (2023). Assessing the overall fit of
       composite models estimated by partial least squares path modeling. European
       Journal of Marketing, 57 (6), 1678–1702. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJM-08-2020-0586
Schuberth, F., Schamberger, T., & Henseler, J. (2024). More powerful parameter tests? No,
       rather biased parameter estimates. Some reflections on path analysis with weighted
       composites. Behavior Research Methods, 56 (4), 4205–4215.
       https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-023-02256-5
Schuberth, F., Schamberger, T., Kemény, I., & Henseler, J. (2025). The sum score model:
       Specifying and testing equally weighted composites using structural equation
       modeling. Psychometrika, 1–43. https://doi.org/10.1017/psy.2024.5
Schuberth, F., Zaza, S., & Henseler, J. (2023). Partial least squares is an estimator for
       structural equation models: A comment on Evermann and Rönkkö (2021).
       Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 52 (1), 711–714.
       https://doi.org/10.17705/1cais.05232
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                             43


Spearman, C. (1904). “General intelligence,” objectively determined and measured. The
       American Journal of Psychology, 15 (2), 201–292. https://doi.org/10.2307/1412107
Strauss, M. E., & Smith, G. T. (2009). Construct validity: Advances in theory and
       methodology. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 5 (1), 1–25.
       https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.032408.153639
Tarka, P. (2017). An overview of structural equation modeling: Its beginnings, historical
       development, usefulness and controversies in the social sciences. Quality & Quantity,
       52 (1), 313–354. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-017-0469-8
Tenenhaus, A., Tenenhaus, M., & Dijkstra, T. K. (2025). Structural equation modeling
       with factors and composites within the framework of the basic design. Advances in
       Data Analysis and Classification. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11634-025-00647-4
Verheyen, K., Guntenspergen, G. R., Biesbrouck, B., & Hermy, M. (2003). An integrated
       analysis of the effects of past land use on forest herb colonization at the landscape
       scale. Journal of Ecology, 91 (5), 731–742.
       https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2745.2003.00807.x
Wilks, S. S. (1938). The large-sample distribution of the likelihood ratio for testing
       composite hypotheses. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 9 (1), 60–62.
       https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177732360
Wold, H. (1975). Path models with latent variables: The NIPALS approach. Academic
       Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-103950-9.50017-4
Wold, H. (1982). Soft modeling: The basic design and some extensions. In K. G. Jöreskog
       & H. Wold (Eds.), Systems under indirect observation: Causality, structure,
       prediction part ii (pp. 1–54). North-Holland.
Wright, S. (1934). The method of path coefficients. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics,
       5 (3), 161–215.
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                             44


Yu, X., Schuberth, F., & Henseler, J. (2023). Specifying composites in structural equation
       modeling: A refinement of the Henseler-Ogasawara specification. Statistical Analysis
       and Data Mining, 16, 348–357. https://doi.org/10.1002/sam.11608
Yu, X., Zaza, S., Schuberth, F., & Henseler, J. (2021). Counterpoint: Representing forged
       concepts as emergent variables using composite-based structural equation modeling.
       ACM SIGMIS Database: the DATABASE for Advances in Information Systems,
       52 (SI), 114–130. https://doi.org/10.1145/3505639.3505647


                                         Appendix

Model Specification

       To obtain the composite loadings, regressions of the composites on their related
indicators need to be performed. For a composite ηi formed by a set of indicators yi , it
holds that:


                                       ηi = wi′ yi                                        (31)

                                      yi = λi ηi                                          (32)
                                           cov(yi , ηi )
                                   ⇒ λi =                                                 (33)
                                             var(ηi )
                                           cov(yi , wi′ yi )
                                         =                                                (34)
                                            wi′ V(yi )wi
                                            V(yi )wi
                                         = ′                                              (35)
                                           wi V(yi )wi

Combining this for all composites yields to:


                                  Λc = T W (W ′ T W )−1
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                       45


Scenario Analysis

       The matrix T contains the unrestricted variances and covariances of the composite
indicators. All remaining entries are set to 0, i.e.:
                                                                           
                               6       2     1.2     0      0    0     0
                                                                          
                               2       5     1.5     0      0    0      0
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                              1.2      1.5   2       0      0    0      0
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                           T =
                               0       0     0       7     0.9 0.5     1.2         (36)
                                                                          
                                                                           
                                                                          
                               0       0     0      0.9     3    0.7   1.8
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                               0       0     0      0.5 0.7      2     0.5
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                    0   0     0      1.2 1.8 0.5        5
                                                                          



The composite matrix W contains the composite weights in its columns, i.e.:
                                                             
                                           1.0            0.0
                                                             
                                           0.4            0.0
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                           0.6            0.0
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                        W =
                                           0.0            1.0
                                                             
                                                              
                                                             
                                           0.0            0.2
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                           0.0            0.5
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                    0.0 0.3
                                                             
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                         46


    Thus, the composite loading matrix is given as:
                                                                
                                          0.67          0.00
                                                            
                                          0.43          0.00
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                          0.27          0.00
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                       Λ = T W (W T W ) = 
                        c        ′     −1
                                          0.00          0.77                        (37)
                                                            
                                                             
                                                            
                                          0.00          0.24
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                          0.00          0.18
                                                            
                                                            
                                                            
                                                    0.00 0.33
                                                            




    The relations between the constructs and the indicators are therefore given as:
                                                                    
                        1.00      0.00 0.00 0.00  y1      ε1 
                                                     
                        0.80      0.00 0.00   0.00
                                                     
                                                     y2  ε2 
                                                        
                        
                                                     
                        0.90      0.00 0.00   0.00
                                                     
                                                     y3  ε3 
                                                        
                        
                                                     
                        0.00      1.00 0.00   0.00
                                                     
                                                     y4  ε4 
                                                        
                        
                                                     
                        0.00      0.70 0.00   0.00
                                                     
                                                     y5  ε5 
                                                      
                        
                  η1 
                                                     
                        0.00      0.80 0.00   0.00
                                                     
                                                     y6  ε6 
                                                      
                      
                  η                                
                   2
                    = 0.00      0.00 0.67         y7  +  0 
                                               0.00                                  (38)
                                                     
                                                        
                      
                  η                                
                   3
                        0.00      0.00 0.43   0.00
                                                     y8   0 
                                                     
                                                      
                      
                   η4                                
                        0.00      0.00 0.27   0.00
                                                     y9   0 
                                                     
                                                        
                        
                                                     
                        0.00      0.00 0.00   0.77
                                                    y10   0 
                                                     
                                                        
                        
                                                     
                        0.00      0.00 0.00   0.24
                                                    y11   0 
                                                     
                                                        
                        
                                                     
                        0.00      0.00 0.00   0.18
                                                    y12   0 
                                                     
                                                        
                        
                                                     
                              0.00 0.00 0.00 0.33                    0
                                                     
                                                       y13




    To obtain the variances of the error terms related to composites, we need to take
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                                           47


into account that the variances of the composites are given by the composite model, i.e.:


              η3 = 1 · y7 + 0.4 · y8 + 0.6 · y9 = (1.0 0.4 0.6)(y7 y8 y9 )′

  ⇒      var(η3 ) = (1.0 0.4 0.6)V(y7 , y8 , y9 )(1.0 0.4 0.6)′ = 11.28

              η4 = 1 · y10 + 0.2 · y11 + 0.5 · y12 + 0.3 · y13 = (1.0 0.2 0.5 0.3)(y10 y11 y12 y13 )′

  ⇒      var(η4 ) = (1.0 0.2 0.5 0.3)V(y10 , y11 , y12 , y13 )(1.0 0.2 0.5 0.3)′ = 10.156


As η4 is also a dependent variable in the structural model, it holds:


                    η4 = 0.6 · η1 + +0.5 · η3 + ζ4

        ⇒     var(η4 ) = 0.62 · var(η1 ) + 0.52 · var(η3 ) + 2 · 0.5 · 0.6 · cov(η1 , η3 ) + var(ζ4 )




Thus, the variance of ζ4 is given as:


      var(ζ4 ) = var(η4 ) − (0.62 · var(η1 ) + 0.52 · var(η3 ) + 2 · 0.5 · 0.6 · cov(η1 , η3 )) = 6.56


Therefore, the model-implied variance-covariance matrix of the structural error terms is
given as:
                                                                          
                                         2.00       0.00    0.10   0.00
                                                                       
                                         0.00       1.50    0.00   0.00
                                                                       

                                var(ζ) =                                                                (39)
                                                                       
                                                                        
                                         0.10       0.00 11.28     0.00
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                             0.00 0.00       0.00   6.56
                                                                       
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                                         48


Consequently, the model-implied variance-covariance matrix of the constructs is given as:


var(η) = (I − B)−1 var(ζ)(I − B)′−1
                                     −1                                                            −1
         1.0     0.0    0.0    0.0        2.00   0.00     0.10     0.00 1.0 −0.2 0.0 −0.6
                                                                                                  
                  1.0 −0.1                  0.00   1.50     0.00          0.0
                                                                      0.00          1.0    0.0    0.0 
                                                                                                  
        −0.2                   −0.3                                       
       =
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
         0.0     0.0    1.0    0.0        0.10   0.00 11.28        0.00
                                                                           0.0    −0.1 1.0
                                                                                                  
                                          
                                                                                                 −0.5
                                                                                                  
             −0.6 0.0 −0.5      1.0          0.00 0.00       0.00     6.56     0.0 −0.3 0.0       1.0
                                                                                                  

                                       
        2.00     0.78   0.10    1.25 
                                     
        0.78     3.10   2.86    3.87 
                                     

       =
                                     
                                      
        0.10     2.86 11.28     5.70 
                                     
                                     
                                     
             1.25 3.87   5.70   10.16
                                     



       While the variance-covariance matrix of the measurement errors of the common
factor indicators Θf is given as a diagonal matrix with 0.5 on the diagonal, the matrix Θc
can be obtained as follows:
                                                                                                   
                              0.99           −1.27 −0.8            0.00     0.00   0.00     0.00 
                                                                                                 
                                               2.87        0.2      0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00 
                                                                                                 
                             −1.27
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                 
                                               0.20        1.2      0.00     0.00   0.00    0.00 
                                                                                                 
                             −0.80
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                 
                          ′
    Θc = T − Λc W ′ T W Λc = 
                              0.00            0.00    0.00         1.02
                                                                                                 
                                                                             −0.93 −0.87    −1.34
                                                                                                 
                              0.00            0.00    0.00 −0.93            2.44   0.28     1.02 
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                 
                              0.00            0.00    0.00 −0.87            0.28   1.68
                                                                                                 
                                                                                           −0.08
                                                                                                 
                                      0.00     0.00    0.00 −1.34            1.02            3.92
                                                                                                 
                                                                                    −0.08
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                         49


     Finally, the model-implied variance-covariance matrix of the indicators is given as:
                                                                                      
        2.50                                                                          
                                                                                      
        1.60   1.78
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
        1.80   1.44 2.12
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
        0.78   0.63 0.71 3.60
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
        0.55   0.44 0.49 2.17 2.02
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
        0.63   0.50 0.57 2.48 1.74 2.49
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
 Σ(y) = 
        0.07   0.05 0.06 1.91 1.33 1.52 6.00
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
                                                                                       
                                                                                      
        0.04   0.03 0.04 1.24 0.87 0.99 2.00 5.00
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
        0.03   0.02 0.02 0.76 0.53 0.61 1.20 1.50 2.00
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
        0.96   0.77 0.86 2.97 2.08 2.37 2.91 1.90 1.16 7.00
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
        0.29   0.24 0.26 0.91 0.64 0.73 0.89 0.58 0.36 0.90 3.00
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
        0.22   0.18 0.20 0.68 0.48 0.55 0.67 0.44 0.27 0.50 0.70 2.00
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
                                                                                      
                                                                                      
         0.41 0.33 0.37 1.26 0.88 1.01 1.24 0.81 0.49 1.20 1.80 0.50 5.00
                                                                                      
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                  50


Table 1
Parameter Estimates Obtained by FC-SEM for a Sample Perfectly Representing the
Population

                       Parameter           Population value   Estimate
                            λ2                   0.8            0.8
                            λ3                   0.9            0.9
                            λ5                   0.7            0.7
                            λ6                   0.8            0.8
                            w8                   0.4            0.4
                            w9                   0.6            0.6
                           w11                   0.2            0.2
                           w12                   0.5            0.5
                           w13                   0.3            0.3
                            b1                   0.5            0.5
                            b2                   0.6            0.6
                            b3                   0.2            0.2
                            b4                   0.3            0.3
                            b5                   0.1            0.1
                           ψ11                   2.0            2.0
                           ψ22                   1.5            1.5
                           ψ13                   0.1            0.1
                     θi (i = 1, . . . 6)         0.5            0.5
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                     51


Table 2
Average Parameter Estimates and Ratio Between The Average Standard Errors and the
Empirical Standard Deviations Obtained by FC-SEM for the Simulation Study (N = 500)

           Parameter   Population Value   Estimate     Average Standard Error
                                                     Empirical Standard Deviation

              λ2             0.8           0.798               0.905
              λ3             0.9           0.900               0.919
              λ5             0.7           0.699               0.782
              λ6             0.8           0.800               0.813
              w8             0.4           0.403               0.933
              w9             0.6           0.609               0.926
              w11            0.2           0.198               0.985
              w12            0.5           0.496               0.983
              w13            0.3           0.306               0.987
              b1             0.5           0.505               0.984
              b2             0.6           0.604               1.004
              b3             0.2           0.200               1.118
              b4             0.3           0.300               1.717
              b5             0.1           0.100               1.443
              ψ11            2.0           1.998               1.015
              ψ22            1.5           1.490               1.149
              ψ13            0.1           0.094               1.004
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                                                          52


Table 3
Standardized Parameter Estimates Obtained by FC-SEM, IGSCA, PLSc, and the H–O
Specification for the Customer Satisfaction Example

                                                                            H–O
Parameter                                FC-SEM (ML)   IGSCA    PLSc     Specification
                                                                            (ML)
Likeability → like1                          0.833      0.801    0.857       0.833
Likeability → like2                          0.774      0.811    0.763       0.774
Likeability → like3                          0.746      0.760    0.741       0.746
attr1 → Attractiveness                       0.430      0.512    0.418       0.430
attr2 → Attractiveness                       0.174      0.264    0.204       0.174
attr3 → Attractiveness                       0.663      0.533    0.656       0.662
CustomerSatisfaction → CustomerLoyalty       0.488      0.535    0.501       0.488
Competence → CustomerLoyalty                -0.090     -0.102   -0.115      -0.090
Likeability → CustomerLoyalty                0.492      0.464    0.530       0.491
Table 4
Comparison of Various Approaches to Deal With Common Factors and Composites in SEM

 Capabilities of the different approaches                                                             Pseudo-
                                                                                          One-Step                  H-O
                                                           PLSc   IGSCA   SVD-SEM   RML              Indicator                   FC-SEM
                                                                                          Approach               Specification
                                                                                                     Approach

 Model Specification

    Fix model parameters to specific values                 -      +/-      +       +       +          +/-          +/-            +

    Constrain model parameters                              -     +/-       ❍       ❍       +           -             -            +

    Specify cross-loadings                                  -      -        -        -      +           +            +             +

    Specify cross-weights                                   -      -        -        -      ❍           -             -            +

    Specify covariances between measurement errors         +/-     +        +       +       +           +            +             +
    Specify covariances between composite indicators and
                                                            -      -        -        -      ❍           -             -            +
    measurement errors
                                                                                                                                          FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM




    Specify composites as dependent variables in the
                                                            +      +        +       +        -          +            +             +
    structural model
    Specify covariances between composites and other
                                                            +      +        +       +        -          +            +             +
    variables in the model
    Specify the model in terms of the parameters of interest +     +        +       +       +           +             -            +

 Model Estimation

    Estimate the composite weights freely                   +      +        +       +       +           -            +             +

    Estimate unstandardized path coefficients               -      +        -        -      +           +            +             +

 Model Assessment

    Calculate analytic asymptotic standard errors           ❍      ❍        ❍       +       +           +            +             +
    Draw direct inference about the model parameters of
                                                            +      +        +       +       +           +             -            +
    interest
 +: The respective approach has the capability; −: The respective approach does not have the capability; +/− In some situations the
respective approach has the capability, in some situations it does not; ❍: It is unclear whether the respective approach has the
capability.
                                                                                                                                          53
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                              54


Figure 1
Example of a Common Factor η With P Measures y1 , . . . yP
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM                            55


Figure 2
Example of a Composite η With P Indicators y1 , . . . yP
FACTOR- AND COMPOSITE-BASED SEM   56


Figure 3
Population Model
